---
title: General Functionality
layout: post
author: Joshua Thijssen
category: internals
date: 2015-01-01 01:00:10
---

# General functionality
There are many support functionality within Saffire. Mostly based in the `src/components/general` directory.

- Hashtables / hashmaps
- Base64 encode/decode
- Bzip2 compressor
- Double linked lists (DLL)
- Mutex and semaphores
- Output handling
- Option parsers
- Path handling
- Stacks based on DLL's
- String functionality
- Unicode (UTF8) functionality


## Hash tables
A hash table (`src/components/general/hash.c`) is a way to simply create hash tables. They are used a lot within Saffire, inside core objects, and even Saffire's userland hash class is nothing more than a wrapper around a hash table.

Creating and using a hashtable is easy:

     t_hash_table *ht = ht_create();
     ht_add_str(ht, "foo", "bar");
     
     char *value = ht_find_str(ht, "foo");
     printf("%s\n", value); // bar

By default, whatever you store inside a hash-table is a `void *`, so you have to be careful storing numerical values, as numerical values can be larger than a pointer address (we still need ot make sure this all works correctly in a platform / compiler agnostic way).

We can store anything we like (it's up to the caller to make sure it knows what it can expect as value), but there are a few different ways to store keys. A key could either be a string, a numerical value, or an object.

To make things more generic, one must use a `t_hash_key` structure to define the actual key, but to make things more comfortable, there are `ht_add_str`, `ht_add_num`, and `ht_add_obj` methods that will deal with this so you won't have to.

Iterating a hashtable is possible too:

    t_hash_iter iter;
    ht_iter_init(&iter, ht);

    while (ht_iter_valid(&iter)) {
        t_hash_key *k = ht_iter_key(&iter);
        t_object *v = (t_object *)(ht_iter_value(&iter));
        
        ht_iter_next(&iter);
    }
    
Since iteration data is located within the t_hash_iter structure, it's possible to have multiple iterations independently and interwoven. However, there could be issues when hashtables are modified during iteration.



## Doubly Linked Lists
DLLs are simple data structure that are fast for sequential reads. They again are used a lot in the core, and the tuple userland class uses this structure internally.


	t_dll *dll = dll_init();
	dll_append(dll, "foo");
	dll_append(dll, "bar");
	
There are additional functions to insert (quickly) in different spots with the help of t_dll_element values.

Iterating can be done through some simple macro's:

    t_dll_element *e = DLL_HEAD(my_dll);
    while (e) {
       char *s = e->data.p;
       
       e = DLL_NEXT(e);
    }

An element uses either `e->data.p` for pointers, and `e->data.l` for numerical values. Again, it's imperative that the called knows what is stored.
