---
title: SAPI - FastCGI
layout: post
author: Joshua Thijssen
category: internals
date: 2015-01-01 00:01:00
---

Saffire relies on the FastCGI (`fcgi_stdio`) library and in essence is really easy in setup. The most work is actually 
done by daemonizing Saffire so it will run in the background.
  
The entrypoint is `fastcgi_run()` from the `src/components/fastcgi/fastcgi_srv.c` file. This will first setup a 
listening socket (either a UNIX socket or an IPV4 socket) in `setup_socket()`. Then it will drop privileges, as no more 
privileges are needed anymore. If Saffire needs to run in the background as a daemon, the `daemonize()` function will 
be called to do this. Otherwise, it will just initialize the fastcgi system and call the `fastcgi_loop()` function.


# Scoreboard
The scoreboard is a way to keep track on what's going on. It's a bit of shared memory so all workers (if daemonized) can 
write their status to it. The `scoreboard_dump()` function can dump this information, so you can figure out what is 
going on from the command line.

# Main loop
The `fcgi_loop()` is the main function. First, it will move the socket that is opened for listing to the fastcgi socket. 
This way, all data written via the fastcgi library will be automatically passed to the open socket (normally, a webserver 
is listening to the other side so it can send the fastcgi data to a connected browser).

We initialize the virtual machine in through `vm_init()` with `VM_RUNMODE_FASTCGI`. It doesn't really do much by itself, 
but it allows you to check with `saffire.sapi()`, and `saffire.fastcgi()` for instance.

Since we are running through fastcgi and not on a commandline, writing data to `STDIN`, `STDOUT` and `STDERR` is not 
useful. Instead, we redirect all saffire output towards new output helpers called `_fcgi_output_char_helper` and 
`_fcgi_output_string_helper`. These will call `FCGX_PutChar` and `FCGX_PutStr` instead of `fwrite(STDOUT, ..`.


Our main loop will be `FCGX_Accept()`, which waits for an incoming connection through FastCGI. It will block until it 
receives one. If so, the scoreboard will be changed (number of requests will be increased).

The file we need to run is located in the FastCGI environment called SCRIPT_FILENAME. If found, we load that file (or 
its bytecode file), convert to bytecode and create an initial stackframe. That frame will be executed through 
`vm_execute()`. Once completed, we destroy the frame, codeblock etc. Then we return back to the `FCGX_Accept()` loop 
again to wait for another connection.


